README.md, before:

# LUV - LaTeX Universal Virtualizer

`luv` is a tool for managing LaTeX projects with isolated package environments, similar to Python virtual environments. It provides reproducible, project-specific LaTeX package management using TeX Live's `tlmgr` in user mode.

## Goals

1. **Reproducibility**: Generate consistent LaTeX builds across different machines and environments
2. **Isolation**: LaTeX packages are installed per-project, preventing version conflicts between projects
3. **Simplicity**: Easy-to-use commands inspired by modern package managers

`luv` is inspired by these amazing tools:

- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) - Fast Python package installer and resolver
- [TinyTeX](https://yihui.org/tinytex/) - Lightweight LaTeX distribution

*DISCLAIMER: In the current form, this is a fun weekend project and is very early stage.*

## Prerequisites

- TeX Live distribution (TinyTeX recommended)
- Python 3.11 or later (for running luv)

Install TinyTeX:

```bash
# macOS/Linux
curl -sL "https://yihui.org/tinytex/install-bin-unix.sh" | sh

# Windows
# See https://yihui.org/tinytex/

```

Eventually I would like the tool to install TeX Live itself, much like
`uv python install` can install different versions of Python.

## Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/StellarStorm/luv.git
cd luv

# Install luv (development mode)
uv tool install -e .
# OR
pip install -e .
```

## Quick Start

```bash
# Initialize a new LaTeX project
luv init

# Analyze your LaTeX files and detect required packages
luv resolve

# Install all packages listed in latex-requirements.txt
luv sync

# Compile your LaTeX document
luv compile

# Add a new package to your project
luv add hyperref

# Show project information
luv info
```

## Commands

### `luv init`

Initialize a new LaTeX environment in the current directory.

```bash
luv init                          # Use main.tex as main file
luv init --texfile manuscript.tex # Specify custom main file
luv init --engine xelatex         # Use XeLaTeX engine
```

**Options:**

- `--texfile FILE`: Main TeX file name (default: `main.tex`)
- `--engine ENGINE`: LaTeX engine (`pdflatex`, `xelatex`, `lualatex`, `latex`)

**Creates:**

- `luv.toml` - Project configuration
- `latex-requirements.txt` - Package dependencies
- `.luv/` - Local LaTeX environment directory

### `luv resolve`

Analyze LaTeX source files to detect required packages automatically.

```bash
luv resolve              # Interactive mode - ask before updating requirements
luv resolve --update     # Automatically update latex-requirements.txt
luv resolve --dry-run    # Show analysis without making changes
```

**Features:**

- Scans `\usepackage{}` declarations in all project files
- Detects package usage patterns (e.g., `\includegraphics` → `graphicx`)
- Maps LaTeX package names to TeX Live package names
- Excludes local `.sty` files and core LaTeX packages
- Recursively analyzes included files (`\input`, `\include`, etc.)

### `luv sync`

Install all packages listed in `latex-requirements.txt`.

```bash
luv sync
```

Uses `tlmgr --usermode` to install packages to the project-local environment.

### `luv add`

Add packages to requirements and install them immediately.

```bash
luv add amsmath hyperref    # Add multiple packages
luv add amsfonts            # Add single package
```

### `luv compile`

Compile the LaTeX project using the local environment.

```bash
luv compile              # Standard compilation
luv compile --clean      # Clean build directory first
```

**Features:**

- Automatically detects bibliography requirements
- Runs appropriate compilation sequence (BibTeX if needed)
- Uses project-local packages via `TEXMFHOME`
- Provides helpful error messages and warnings

### `luv remove`

Remove the local LaTeX environment (`.luv/` directory).

```bash
luv remove
```

Preserves `luv.toml` and `latex-requirements.txt`.

### `luv info`

Display project configuration and package information.

```bash
luv info
```

## Project Structure

After running `luv init`, your project will have:

```text
your-project/
├── luv.toml                    # Project configuration
├── latex-requirements.txt     # Package dependencies
├── main.tex                   # Your LaTeX document
├── .luv/                      # Local environment (auto-generated)
│   ├── texmf/                 # Local TeX tree
│   │   └── tex/latex/         # Installed packages
│   └── bin/                   # Local binaries
└── build/                     # Compilation output (auto-generated)
```

## Configuration

### `luv.toml`

Project configuration file:

```toml
[project]
texfile = "main.tex"      # Main TeX file
output_dir = "build"      # Compilation output directory
engine = "pdflatex"       # LaTeX engine
```

### `latex-requirements.txt`

Package dependencies file:

```text
# LaTeX package requirements
# Generated by 'luv resolve'

amsmath
graphicx
hyperref
booktabs
```

Supports comments and can be edited manually.

## Package Name Mapping

`luv` automatically maps LaTeX package names to TeX Live package names.
For example:

| LaTeX Package | TeX Live Package | Notes |
|---------------|------------------|-------|
| `algorithmic` | `algorithms` | |
| `amssymb` | `amsfonts` | |
| `graphicx` | `graphics` | |
| `textcomp` | (core) | Part of base LaTeX |
| `fontenc` | (core) | Part of base LaTeX |
| `subcaption` | `caption` | |

Core LaTeX packages are automatically excluded from requirements since they're part of the base system.

## Troubleshooting

### Package Installation Issues

If `tlmgr` fails to install a package:

1. **Package not found**: The package might have a different name in TeX Live or be part of a larger package collection
2. **Permission errors**: Ensure you have write permissions to the project directory
3. **Network issues**: Check your internet connection for downloading packages

### Font Map Warnings

Font map update failures are usually harmless:

```text
Package installed but font map update failed (this is usually OK)
```

This commonly occurs with TinyTeX and doesn't affect compilation.

### Missing Dependencies

If compilation fails due to missing packages:

1. Run `luv resolve` to detect missing packages
2. Run `luv sync` to install them
3. Check the compilation log in `build/` for specific errors

## Examples

### Basic Academic Paper

```bash
# Set up project
luv init --texfile paper.tex

# Edit paper.tex to include your content with packages like:
# \usepackage{amsmath,amssymb,graphicx,hyperref,natbib}

# Detect and install required packages
luv resolve
luv sync

# Compile
luv compile
```

### Complex Document with TikZ

```bash
luv init --texfile thesis.tex --engine xelatex
luv add pgf
luv compile
```

### Collaborative Project

Share your project configuration:

```bash
# Other collaborators can reproduce your environment
git clone your-project.git
cd your-project
luv sync    # Install all required packages
luv compile # Build the document
```

## Contributing

This project is in early development. Contributions welcome!

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests if applicable
5. Submit a pull request

## License

MIT license, copyright (C) 2025 Skylar Gay. See LICENSE.md for details.

## Acknowledgments

- TeX Live team for `tlmgr`
- TinyTeX project for inspiration
- uv project for the excellent CLI design patterns

Commit message:

Substantially improve package resolution
Instead of maintaining a large mapping of package names, this uses tlmgr to resolve the TexLive names for most

This is much less brittle! Still definitely room for improvement though.

As well, packages can be uninstalled with the "remove" command.
"luv clean" takes over removing the .luv environment

README.md, after:

# LUV - LaTeX Universal Virtualizer

`luv` is a tool for managing LaTeX projects with isolated package environments, similar to Python virtual environments. It provides reproducible, project-specific LaTeX package management using TeX Live's `tlmgr` in user mode.

## Goals

1. **Reproducibility**: Generate consistent LaTeX builds across different machines and environments
2. **Isolation**: LaTeX packages are installed per-project, preventing version conflicts between projects
3. **Simplicity**: Easy-to-use commands inspired by modern package managers

`luv` is inspired by these amazing tools:

- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) - Fast Python package installer and resolver
- [TinyTeX](https://yihui.org/tinytex/) - Lightweight LaTeX distribution

*DISCLAIMER: In the current form, this is a fun weekend project and is very early stage.*

## Prerequisites

- TeX Live distribution (TinyTeX recommended)
- Python 3.11 or later (for running luv)

Install TinyTeX:

```bash
# macOS/Linux
curl -sL "https://yihui.org/tinytex/install-bin-unix.sh" | sh

# Windows
# See https://yihui.org/tinytex/

```

Eventually I would like the tool to install TeX Live itself, much like
`uv python install` can install different versions of Python.

## Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/StellarStorm/luv.git
cd luv

# Install luv (development mode)
uv tool install -e .
# OR
pip install -e .
```

## Quick Start

```bash
# Initialize a new LaTeX project
luv init

# Analyze your LaTeX files and detect required packages
luv resolve

# Install all packages listed in latex-requirements.txt
luv sync

# Compile your LaTeX document
luv compile

# Add a new package to your project
luv add hyperref

# Show project information
luv info
```

## Commands

### `luv init`

Initialize a new LaTeX environment in the current directory.

```bash
luv init                          # Use main.tex as main file
luv init --texfile manuscript.tex # Specify custom main file
luv init --engine xelatex         # Use XeLaTeX engine
```

**Options:**

- `--texfile FILE`: Main TeX file name (default: `main.tex`)
- `--engine ENGINE`: LaTeX engine (`pdflatex`, `xelatex`, `lualatex`, `latex`)

**Creates:**

- `luv.toml` - Project configuration
- `latex-requirements.txt` - Package dependencies
- `.luv/` - Local LaTeX environment directory

### `luv resolve`

Analyze LaTeX source files to detect required packages automatically.

```bash
luv resolve              # Interactive mode - ask before updating requirements
luv resolve --update     # Automatically update latex-requirements.txt
luv resolve --dry-run    # Show analysis without making changes
```

**Features:**

- Scans `\usepackage{}` declarations in all project files
- Detects package usage patterns (e.g., `\includegraphics` → `graphicx`)
- Maps LaTeX package names to TeX Live package names
- Excludes local `.sty` files and core LaTeX packages
- Recursively analyzes included files (`\input`, `\include`, etc.)

### `luv sync`

Install all packages listed in `latex-requirements.txt`.

```bash
luv sync
```

Uses `tlmgr --usermode` to install packages to the project-local environment.

### `luv add`

Add packages to requirements and install them immediately.

```bash
luv add amsmath hyperref    # Add multiple packages
luv add amsfonts            # Add single package
```

### `luv compile`

Compile the LaTeX project using the local environment.

```bash
luv compile              # Standard compilation
luv compile --clean      # Clean build directory first
```

**Features:**

- Automatically detects bibliography requirements
- Runs appropriate compilation sequence (BibTeX if needed)
- Uses project-local packages via `TEXMFHOME`
- Provides helpful error messages and warnings

### `luv remove`

Remove packages from requirements and uninstall them from the local environment.

```bash
luv remove amsmath hyperref    # Remove multiple packages
luv remove tikz               # Remove single package
```

Automatically removes packages from both the local environment and `latex-requirements.txt`.

### `luv clean`

Remove the entire local LaTeX environment (`.luv/` directory).

```bash
luv clean
```

Preserves `luv.toml` and `latex-requirements.txt`.

### `luv info`

Display project configuration and package information.

```bash
luv info
```

## Project Structure

After running `luv init`, your project will have:

```text
your-project/
├── luv.toml                    # Project configuration
├── latex-requirements.txt     # Package dependencies
├── main.tex                   # Your LaTeX document
├── .luv/                      # Local environment (auto-generated)
│   ├── texmf/                 # Local TeX tree
│   │   └── tex/latex/         # Installed packages
│   └── bin/                   # Local binaries
└── build/                     # Compilation output (auto-generated)
```

## Configuration

### `luv.toml`

Project configuration file:

```toml
[project]
texfile = "main.tex"      # Main TeX file
output_dir = "build"      # Compilation output directory
engine = "pdflatex"       # LaTeX engine
```

### `latex-requirements.txt`

Package dependencies file:

```text
# LaTeX package requirements
# Generated by 'luv resolve'

amsmath
graphicx
hyperref
booktabs
```

Supports comments and can be edited manually.

## Package Name Mapping

`luv` automatically maps LaTeX package names to TeX Live package names.
For example:

| LaTeX Package | TeX Live Package | Notes |
|---------------|------------------|-------|
| `algorithmic` | `algorithms` | |
| `amssymb` | `amsfonts` | |
| `graphicx` | `graphics` | |
| `textcomp` | (core) | Part of base LaTeX |
| `fontenc` | (core) | Part of base LaTeX |
| `subcaption` | `caption` | |

Core LaTeX packages are automatically excluded from requirements since they're part of the base system.

## Troubleshooting

### Package Installation Issues

If `tlmgr` fails to install a package:

1. **Package not found**: The package might have a different name in TeX Live or be part of a larger package collection
2. **Permission errors**: Ensure you have write permissions to the project directory
3. **Network issues**: Check your internet connection for downloading packages

### Font Map Warnings

Font map update failures are usually harmless:

```text
Package installed but font map update failed (this is usually OK)
```

This commonly occurs with TinyTeX and doesn't affect compilation.

### Missing Dependencies

If compilation fails due to missing packages:

1. Run `luv resolve` to detect missing packages
2. Run `luv sync` to install them
3. Check the compilation log in `build/` for specific errors

## Examples

### Basic Academic Paper

```bash
# Set up project
luv init --texfile paper.tex

# Edit paper.tex to include your content with packages like:
# \usepackage{amsmath,amssymb,graphicx,hyperref,natbib}

# Detect and install required packages
luv resolve
luv sync

# Compile
luv compile
```

### Complex Document with TikZ

```bash
luv init --texfile thesis.tex --engine xelatex
luv add pgf
luv compile
```

### Collaborative Project

Share your project configuration:

```bash
# Other collaborators can reproduce your environment
git clone your-project.git
cd your-project
luv sync    # Install all required packages
luv compile # Build the document
```

## Contributing

This project is in early development. Contributions welcome!

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests if applicable
5. Submit a pull request

## License

MIT license, copyright (C) 2025 Skylar Gay. See LICENSE.md for details.

## Acknowledgments

- TeX Live team for `tlmgr`
- TinyTeX project for inspiration
- uv project for the excellent CLI design patterns
